Often when we consider X-rays, we think of
broken bones or teeth. This is because they are
dense tissues and show up well on X-ray.
Soft tissues do not absorb X-rays and so the
signal is far less attenuated. Even more importantly,
we cannot differentiate between the different
types of soft tissue. If we could introduce
something dense, this will absorb the X-rays.
Metals are dense, and so opaque to X-rays.
And so they can be used to add contrast to
the image. Barium is one such metal. It has
an atomic mass of 56, and so is very dense,
compared to tissue. Of course the problem
is that barium ions in solution, are highly
toxic and very reactive. However, if we use
barium sulphate, this is extremely insoluble
in water, so there are no free ions, and it
is a powder. This powder can be given as a
slurry in the water, which can be swallowed. The
density of this mixture can achieve 4.5 g per millilitre.
The radiographer then takes a
series of images, using a technique called
fluoroscopy. This is done as the patient drinks
or swallows the slurry. Here is an X-ray before starting.
Can you pick the oesophagus in this
image? What about now? You can easily see
the oesophagus, as the slurry passes to the
stomach. If there was a partial obstruction
in the oesophagus, or a leak, it could be very
easy to see. So in summary the barium absorbs
the X-rays. This means the signal is attenuated.
So the image appears dark. Hopefully, you
can now see how we can combine the different
concepts to build up a procedure that can
provide the information that the doctor needs.